University of Montana
ScholarWorks at University of Montana

封面:

2011
The Categories of Graphs
Demitri Joel Plessas
The University of Montana

Recommended Citation
Plessas, Demitri Joel, "The Categories of Graphs" (2011). Graduate Student Theses, Dissertations, & Professional Papers. 967.
https://scholarworks.umt.edu/etd/967

This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by the Graduate School at ScholarWorks at University of Montana. It has been accepted for
inclusion in Graduate Student Theses, Dissertations, & Professional Papers by an authorized administrator of ScholarWorks at University of Montana.
For more information, please contact scholarworks@mso.umt.edu.

THE CATEGORIES OF GRAPHS
By
Demitri Joel Plessas
B.S. Montana Tech of the University of Montana, USA, 2006
M.A. The University of Montana, USA, 2008
Dissertation
presented in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
in Mathematics
The University of Montana
Missoula, MT

May 2011

Approved by:
Perry Brown, Associate Provost for Graduate Education
Graduate School
Dr. George McRae, Chair
Mathematical Sciences
Dr. Peter Golubtsov
Mathematical Sciences
Dr. Kelly McKinnie
Mathematical Sciences
Dr. Nikolaus Vonessen
Mathematical Sciences
Dr. Joel Henry
Computer Science

====

Committee Chair: George McRae, Ph.D.

In traditional studies of graph theory, the graphs allow only one edge to be incident to any two vertices, not necessarily distinct, and the graph morphisms must map edges to edges and vertices to vertices while preserving incidence. We refer to these restricted morphisms as strict morphisms. We relax the conditions on the graphs by allowing any number of edges to be incident to any two vertices, as well as relaxing the condition on graph morphisms by allowing edges to be mapped to vertices, provided that incidence is still preserved. We call the broader category of these graphs and these morphisms the Category of Conceptual Graphs and Graph Morphisms, denoted Grphs. 

We then define four other concrete categories of graphs created by combinations of restrictions of the graph morphisms as well as restrictions on the allowed graphs.We determine the categorial structure of these six categories of graphs by characterizing common categorially defined structures and properties and by characterizing six special types of monomorphisms, and dually six special types of epimorphisms. We also establish the Fundamental Morphism Theorem in two of the categories of graphs. We then provide an Elementary Theory for five categories of graphs, producing a list of firstorder axioms that, when taken with the higher-order axiom of the existence of small products and coproducts, characterizes these five categories of graphs. We also provide a result toward Hedetniemi’s conjecture that arose from the study of the categories of graphs.


在传统的图论教学中, 图只允许一条边连接在两个节点之间(可以相同). 而在范畴意义下, 图的态射必须是边到边/点到点的映射, 并保持着连接关系. 

[致谢]

[记号表]


Chapter 1
Introduction - Concrete Categories of Graphs and Their Elementary Theories

第一章
介绍 - 图的具体范畴及其基本理论

Often the study of morphisms of any mathematical object starts with the study of automorphisms. In graph theory, this study produced representation theorems for groups as automorphism groups of graphs. The study of automorphisms also produced characterizations of
graphs (e.g. vertex-transitive graphs and distance-transitive graphs). More recently, finding
restrictions of the automorphism set for the graph by considering automorphisms that fix
vertex colors or by considering automorphisms that fix certain sets of vertices produced useful
new graph parameters (the distinguishing number [2] and fixing number [10] for a graph).
The study of morphisms then delves into the study of endomorphisms and finally homomorphisms. In graph theory, a certain class of graph homomorphisms generalizes vertex-coloring,
and is now being widely studied. In 2004, a textbook was published about these graph homomorphisms [14]

所有数学对象对态射(morphisms)的引入往往都离不开对于自同构(automorphisms)的研究. 在图论中, 这一理论带来了群表示论, 能够表示图的自同构群. 自同构理论还带来了图的表征(characterizations), 比如顶点传递图( vertex-transitive graphs)与距离传递图(distance-transitive graphs). 有最近的研究, 通过考虑满足节点颜色的自同构, 或是通过考虑用给定的点集作为参数生成有价值的新的图(比如图的可区别数(distinguishing number)[2]/固定数(fixing number)[10])的自同构, 来找到图的自同构集合的约束. 对态射的研究还进入了自同态(endomorphisms)的研究领域并最终被到达同态(homomorphisms)的研究领域中. 在图论中, 图同态的一个确定的类别推广到了点染色问题上, 现在正在得到广泛的研究. 2004年, 有一本关于这种图同态的textbook出版[14].

The most common category considered in (undirected) graph theory is a category where
graphs are defined as having at most one edge incident to any two vertices and at most one
loop incident to any vertex. We will refer to these graphs as simple graphs. The morphisms
are usually described as a pair of functions between the vertex sets and edge sets that respect
edge incidence. We refer to these restricted morphisms as strict morphisms. We call this
category the Category of Simple Graphs with Strict Morphisms, denoted SiStGrphs

(无向图的)图论中最常被考虑到的范畴是如下的范畴. 这一范畴对图的定义是, 任意两点间最多连一条边, 任意一个点最多有一个自环. 我们称这样的图为简单图(simple graphs). 这个范畴对应的态射则是边集到点集的一对映射, 表示了图中边的连接. 这样的受限的态射称为严格态射(strict morphisms). 对于简单图上带着严格态射的范畴, 我们记作SiStGrphs(Simple-Strict-Graphs).

We will relax the conditions on the graphs by allowing any number of edges to be incident
to any two vertices (referred to as conceptual graphs), as well as relaxing the condition on
graph morphisms by allowing edges to be mapped to vertices, provided that incidence is still
preserved. We call the broader category of these graphs and these morphisms the Category
of Conceptual Graphs with Graph Morphisms, denoted Grphs.

我们可以把要求放宽一些, 允许两点间连接任意数量的边(称为概念图*(conceptual graphs)). 同时也就放宽了图态射的要求, 只要连接关系能够保持, 点就可以映射到边. 对于上述的概念图*与态射构成的这样涵盖更广的范畴, 记作Grphs.

*:这个说法并不常见
译注:注意态射需要能够复合

We also consider the restriction on a graph where no edge is allowed to be incident to a
single vertex, called loopless. Using the restrictions of strict, simple, and loopless, we define
four more categories of graphs (for details see Section 2.2)

我们也可以限制对图的定义, 不允许一条边连接同一个点, 也就是说没有自环(loopless). 使用严格态射, 简单图, 没有自环, 这三个限制的使用与否, 总共产生了下表所示的四个新的图范畴. (细节见2.2节)

Category Full Category Name
Grphs         The Category of Conceptual Graphs with Graph Morphisms
              概念图+图态射 的范畴
SiGrphs        The Category of Simple Graphs with Graph Morphisms
              简单图+图态射 的范畴
SiLlGrphs        The Category of Simple Loopless Graphs with Graph Morphisms
              无自环简单图+图态射 的范畴
StGrphs         The Category of Conceptual Graphs with Strict Morphisms
              概念图+严格态射 的范畴
SiStGrphs         The Category of Simple Graphs with Strict Morphisms
              简单图+严格态射 的范畴
SiLlStGrphs        The Category of Simple Loopless Graphs with Strict Morphisms
              无自环简单图+严格态射 的范畴
              
注: 对于数学系的而言, "集合的集合"是一个很大的问题, 但是对于CS人, 似乎天然就很习惯分层的做法...

We provide an inclusion diagram of these six categories of graphs, with a seventh category of
graphs, Sets (The Category of Sets and Functions), considered as a graph category consisting
of “empty edge graphs” (Figure 1.1). We note that these categories are concrete: the objects
are sets with structure and the morphisms are structure preserving functions (see Definition
2.2.1).

我们给出了一个描述这六种范畴的包含关系的图标(Figure 1.1), 另外还加上了第七个图范畴, "Sets"(集合于映射的范畴), 描述了没有边的图. ......

Figure 1.1: An inclusion diagram of the Categories of Graphs

In Section 2.3, we investigate these six concrete categories of graphs and determine the categorial structure by finding the concrete existence of abstractly defined categorial structures and properties or finding counterexamples to their existence (throughout we use the term categorial instead of categorical as categorical is used in model theory to denote a theory with a unique model up to isomorphism, see [11]).

在2.3节, 












